README.md, before:

<img src="logo.png" width="800em"/> <br>

<!-- badges: start -->
[![GitHub license](https://badgen.net/github/license/echasnovski/mini.nvim)](https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim/blob/main/LICENSE)
[![GitHub tag](https://badgen.net/github/tag/echasnovski/mini.nvim)](https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim/tags/)
[![Current version](https://badgen.net/badge/Current%20version/development/cyan)](https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md)
<!-- badges: end -->

Library of 40+ independent Lua modules improving overall [Neovim](https://github.com/neovim/neovim) (version 0.9 and higher) experience with minimal effort. They all share same configuration approaches and general design principles.

Think about this project as "Swiss Army knife" among Neovim plugins: it has many different independent tools (modules) suitable for most common tasks. Each module can be used separately without any startup and usage overhead.

If you want to help this project grow but don't know where to start, check out [contributing guides](CONTRIBUTING.md) or leave a Github star for 'mini.nvim' project and/or any its standalone Git repositories.

## Table of contents

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Modules](#modules)
- [General principles](#general-principles)
- [Plugin colorschemes](#plugin-colorschemes)
- [Planned modules](#planned-modules)

## Installation

There are two branches to install from:

- `main` (default, **recommended**) will have latest development version of plugin. All changes since last stable release should be perceived as being in beta testing phase (meaning they already passed alpha-testing and are moderately settled).
- `stable` will be updated only upon releases with code tested during public beta-testing phase in `main` branch.

Here are code snippets for some common installation methods:

- Manually with `git clone` (compatible with [mini.deps](https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim/blob/main/readmes/mini-deps.md)):

```lua
-- Put this at the top of 'init.lua'
local path_package = vim.fn.stdpath('data') .. '/site'
local mini_path = path_package .. '/pack/deps/start/mini.nvim'
if not vim.loop.fs_stat(mini_path) then
  vim.cmd('echo "Installing `mini.nvim`" | redraw')
  local clone_cmd = {
    'git', 'clone', '--filter=blob:none',
    -- Uncomment next line to use 'stable' branch
    -- '--branch', 'stable',
    'https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim', mini_path
  }
  vim.fn.system(clone_cmd)
  vim.cmd('packadd mini.nvim | helptags ALL')
end
```

- With [folke/lazy.nvim](https://github.com/folke/lazy.nvim):

| Branch | Code snippet                                    |
|--------|-------------------------------------------------|
| Main   | `{ 'echasnovski/mini.nvim', version = false },` |
| Stable | `{ 'echasnovski/mini.nvim', version = '*' },`   |

- With [junegunn/vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug):

| Branch | Code snippet                                           |
|--------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Main   | `Plug 'echasnovski/mini.nvim'`                         |
| Stable | `Plug 'echasnovski/mini.nvim', { 'branch': 'stable' }` |

- Every module is also distributed as a standalone Git repository. Check out module's information for more details.

**Important**: don't forget to call module's `setup()` (if required) to enable its functionality.

**Note**: if you are on Windows, there might be problems with too long file paths (like `error: unable to create file <some file name>: Filename too long`). Try doing one of the following:
- Enable corresponding git global config value: `git config --system core.longpaths true`. Then try to reinstall.
- Install plugin in other place with shorter path.

## Modules

'mini.nvim' contains many modules which is slightly daunting at first. All of them can be used independently, one at a time. For easier exploration, here they are presented in groups based on module's primary functionality (although some modules can fit in several groups).

### Text editing

These modules improve your text editing experience. Start with 'mini.ai', 'mini.operators', and 'mini.surround'.

| Module          | Description                           | Overview                             | Details                              |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| mini.ai         | Extend and create `a`/`i` textobjects | [README](readmes/mini-ai.md)         | [Help file](doc/mini-ai.txt)         |
| mini.align      | Align text interactively              | [README](readmes/mini-align.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-align.txt)      |
| mini.comment    | Comment lines                         | [README](readmes/mini-comment.md)    | [Help file](doc/mini-comment.txt)    |
| mini.completion | Completion and signature help         | [README](readmes/mini-completion.md) | [Help file](doc/mini-completion.txt) |
| mini.move       | Move any selection in any direction   | [README](readmes/mini-move.md)       | [Help file](doc/mini-move.txt)       |
| mini.operators  | Text edit operators                   | [README](readmes/mini-operators.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-operators.txt)  |
| mini.pairs      | Autopairs                             | [README](readmes/mini-pairs.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-pairs.txt)      |
| mini.snippets   | Manage and expand snippets            | [README](readmes/mini-snippets.md)   | [Help file](doc/mini-snippets.txt)   |
| mini.splitjoin  | Split and join arguments              | [README](readmes/mini-splitjoin.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-splitjoin.txt)  |
| mini.surround   | Surround actions                      | [README](readmes/mini-surround.md)   | [Help file](doc/mini-surround.txt)   |

### General workflow

These modules improve your general workflow. Start with 'mini.bracketed', 'mini.files', and 'mini.pick'.

| Module         | Description                              | Overview                            | Details                             |
|----------------|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| mini.basics    | Common configuration presets             | [README](readmes/mini-basics.md)    | [Help file](doc/mini-basics.txt)    |
| mini.bracketed | Go forward/backward with square brackets | [README](readmes/mini-bracketed.md) | [Help file](doc/mini-bracketed.txt) |
| mini.bufremove | Remove buffers                           | [README](readmes/mini-bufremove.md) | [Help file](doc/mini-bufremove.txt) |
| mini.clue      | Show next key clues                      | [README](readmes/mini-clue.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-clue.txt)      |
| mini.deps      | Plugin manager                           | [README](readmes/mini-deps.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-deps.txt)      |
| mini.diff      | Work with diff hunks                     | [README](readmes/mini-diff.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-diff.txt)      |
| mini.extra     | Extra 'mini.nvim' functionality          | [README](readmes/mini-extra.md)     | [Help file](doc/mini-extra.txt)     |
| mini.files     | Navigate and manipulate file system      | [README](readmes/mini-files.md)     | [Help file](doc/mini-files.txt)     |
| mini.git       | Git integration                          | [README](readmes/mini-git.md)       | [Help file](doc/mini-git.txt)       |
| mini.jump      | Jump to next/previous single character   | [README](readmes/mini-jump.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-jump.txt)      |
| mini.jump2d    | Jump within visible lines                | [README](readmes/mini-jump2d.md)    | [Help file](doc/mini-jump2d.txt)    |
| mini.misc      | Miscellaneous functions                  | [README](readmes/mini-misc.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-misc.txt)      |
| mini.pick      | Pick anything                            | [README](readmes/mini-pick.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-pick.txt)      |
| mini.sessions  | Session management                       | [README](readmes/mini-sessions.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-sessions.txt)  |
| mini.visits    | Track and reuse file system visits       | [README](readmes/mini-visits.md)    | [Help file](doc/mini-visits.txt)    |

### Appearance

These modules improve your Neovim appearance. Start with 'mini.hues', 'mini.icons', and 'mini.statusline'.

| Module           | Description                          | Overview                              | Details                               |
|------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| mini.animate     | Animate common Neovim actions        | [README](readmes/mini-animate.md)     | [Help file](doc/mini-animate.txt)     |
| mini.base16      | Base16 colorscheme creation          | [README](readmes/mini-base16.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-base16.txt)      |
| mini.colors      | Tweak and save any color scheme      | [README](readmes/mini-colors.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-colors.txt)      |
| mini.cursorword  | Autohighlight word under cursor      | [README](readmes/mini-cursorword.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-cursorword.txt)  |
| mini.hipatterns  | Highlight patterns in text           | [README](readmes/mini-hipatterns.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-hipatterns.txt)  |
| mini.hues        | Generate configurable color scheme   | [README](readmes/mini-hues.md)        | [Help file](doc/mini-hues.txt)        |
| mini.icons       | Icon provider                        | [README](readmes/mini-icons.md)       | [Help file](doc/mini-icons.txt)       |
| mini.indentscope | Visualize and work with indent scope | [README](readmes/mini-indentscope.md) | [Help file](doc/mini-indentscope.txt) |
| mini.map         | Window with buffer text overview     | [README](readmes/mini-map.md)         | [Help file](doc/mini-map.txt)         |
| mini.notify      | Show notifications                   | [README](readmes/mini-notify.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-notify.txt)      |
| mini.starter     | Start screen                         | [README](readmes/mini-starter.md)     | [Help file](doc/mini-starter.txt)     |
| mini.statusline  | Statusline                           | [README](readmes/mini-statusline.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-statusline.txt)  |
| mini.tabline     | Tabline                              | [README](readmes/mini-tabline.md)     | [Help file](doc/mini-tabline.txt)     |
| mini.trailspace  | Trailspace (highlight and remove)    | [README](readmes/mini-trailspace.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-trailspace.txt)  |

### Other

These modules don't quite fit in any of the previous categories.

| Module     | Description                | Overview                        | Details                         |
|------------|----------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| mini.doc   | Generate Neovim help files | [README](readmes/mini-doc.md)   | [Help file](doc/mini-doc.txt)   |
| mini.fuzzy | Fuzzy matching             | [README](readmes/mini-fuzzy.md) | [Help file](doc/mini-fuzzy.txt) |
| mini.test  | Test Neovim plugins        | [README](readmes/mini-test.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-test.txt)  |

## General principles

- **Design**. Each module is designed to solve a particular problem targeting balance between feature-richness (handling as many edge-cases as possible) and simplicity of implementation/support. Granted, not all of them ended up with the same balance, but it is the goal nevertheless.

- **Independence**. Modules are independent of each other and can be run without external dependencies. Although some of them may need dependencies for full experience.

- **Structure**. Each module is a submodule for a placeholder "mini" module. So, for example, "surround" module should be referred to as "mini.surround".  As later will be explained, this plugin can also be referred to as "MiniSurround".

- **Setup**:
    - Each module you want to use should be enabled separately with `require(<name of module>).setup({})`. Possibly replace `{}` with your config table or omit altogether to use defaults. You can supply only parts of config, the rest will be inferred from defaults.

    - Call to module's `setup()` always creates a global Lua object with coherent camel-case name: `require('mini.surround').setup()` creates `_G.MiniSurround`. This allows for a simpler usage of plugin functionality: instead of `require('mini.surround')` use `MiniSurround` (or manually `:lua MiniSurround.*` in command line); available from `v:lua` like `v:lua.MiniSurround`. Considering this, "module" and "Lua object" names can be used interchangeably: 'mini.surround' and 'MiniSurround' will mean the same thing.

    - Each supplied `config` table is stored in `config` field of global object. Like `MiniSurround.config`.

    - Values of `config` which affect runtime activity can be changed on the fly to have effect. For example, `MiniSurround.config.n_lines` can be changed during runtime; but changing `MiniSurround.config.mappings` won't have any effect (as mappings are created once during `setup()`).

- **Buffer local configuration**. Each module can be additionally configured to use certain runtime config settings locally to buffer. See `mini.nvim-buffer-local-config` section in help file for more information.

- **Buffer names**. All module-related buffers are named according to the following format: `mini<module-name>://<buffer-number>/<useful-info>` (forward slashes are used on any platform; `<useful-info>` may be empty). This structure allows creating identifiable, reasonably unique, and useful buffer names. For example, 'mini.files' buffers are created per displayed directory/file with names like `minifiles://10/path/to/displayed/directory`.

- **Disabling**. Each module's core functionality can be disabled globally or locally to buffer. See "Disabling" section in module's help page for more details. See `mini.nvim-disabling-recipes` section in main help file for common recipes.

- **Silencing**. Each module providing non-error feedback can be configured to not do that by setting `config.silent = true` (either inside `setup()` call or on the fly).

- **Highlighting**. Appearance of module's output is controlled by certain set of highlight groups (see `:h highlight-groups`). By default they usually link to some semantically close built-in highlight group and are ensured to be defined after any color scheme takes effect. Use `:highlight` command or `vim.api.nvim_set_hl()` Lua function to customize highlighting. To see a more calibrated look, use 'mini.hues', 'mini.base16', or plugin's color scheme.

- **Stability**. Each module upon release is considered to be relatively stable: both in terms of setup and functionality. Any non-bugfix backward-incompatible change will be released gradually as much as possible.

- **Not filetype/language specific**. Including functionality which needs several filetype/language specific implementations is an explicit no-goal of this project. This is mostly due to the potential increase in maintenance to keep implementation up to date. However, any part which might need filetype/language specific tuning should be designed to allow it by letting user set proper buffer options and/or local configuration.

## Plugin colorschemes

This plugin comes with several color schemes (all have both dark and light variants):

- `randomhue` - random background and foreground of the same hue with medium saturation.
- `minicyan` - cyan and grey main colors with medium contrast and saturation palette.
- `minischeme` - blue and yellow main colors with high contrast and saturation palette.

Activate them as regular `colorscheme` (for example, `:colorscheme randomhue` or `:colorscheme minicyan`). You can see how they look in [demo of 'mini.hues'](readmes/mini-hues.md#demo) or [demo of 'mini.base16'](readmes/mini-base16.md#demo).

## Planned modules

This is the list of modules I currently intend to implement eventually (as my free time and dedication will allow), in alphabetical order:

- 'mini.abbrev' - helper to manage/setup Insert mode abbreviations.
- 'mini.cmdline' - improved Command line. Possibly with custom `vim.ui.input` implementation.
- 'mini.cycle' - cycle through alternatives with pre-defined rules. Something like [monaqa/dial.nvim](https://github.com/monaqa/dial.nvim) and [AndrewRadev/switch.vim](https://github.com/AndrewRadev/switch.vim)
- 'mini.folds' - more capable and user-friendly folds.
- 'mini.keymap' - utilities to make non-trivial mappings: like [max397574/better-escape.nvim](https://github.com/max397574/better-escape.nvim), dot-repeatable mappings, "super" mappings (super-tab, super-shift-tab, super-enter).
- 'mini.repl' - extendable wrapper for REPLs with built-in support for R, Python, Julia, and maybe (just maybe) some AI tools.
- 'mini.sendtext' - send text between buffers. In particular between regular and built-in terminal buffers.
- 'mini.statuscolumn' - customizable 'statuscolumn'.
- 'mini.terminals' - coherently manage interactive terminal buffers. Something like [kassio/neoterm](https://github.com/kassio/neoterm). Might also incorporate functionality to asynchronously run code in shell with post-processed results.
- 'mini.quickfix' - more capable and user-friendly quickfix list. Possibly with preview and inline editing for search-and-replace workflow.
- 'mini.windows' - window manager. Interactive picker, layout organizer, and maybe more.

Commit message:

feat(ALL)!: stop forcing option values behind `set_vim_settings`
Details:
- Instead set them automatically in `setup()` if not set by user/plugin
  before it (no matter the value).
  Document this as a new general principle to be followed in the future.

README.md, after:

<img src="logo.png" width="800em"/> <br>

<!-- badges: start -->
[![GitHub license](https://badgen.net/github/license/echasnovski/mini.nvim)](https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim/blob/main/LICENSE)
[![GitHub tag](https://badgen.net/github/tag/echasnovski/mini.nvim)](https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim/tags/)
[![Current version](https://badgen.net/badge/Current%20version/development/cyan)](https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md)
<!-- badges: end -->

Library of 40+ independent Lua modules improving overall [Neovim](https://github.com/neovim/neovim) (version 0.9 and higher) experience with minimal effort. They all share same configuration approaches and general design principles.

Think about this project as "Swiss Army knife" among Neovim plugins: it has many different independent tools (modules) suitable for most common tasks. Each module can be used separately without any startup and usage overhead.

If you want to help this project grow but don't know where to start, check out [contributing guides](CONTRIBUTING.md) or leave a Github star for 'mini.nvim' project and/or any its standalone Git repositories.

## Table of contents

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Modules](#modules)
- [General principles](#general-principles)
- [Plugin colorschemes](#plugin-colorschemes)
- [Planned modules](#planned-modules)

## Installation

There are two branches to install from:

- `main` (default, **recommended**) will have latest development version of plugin. All changes since last stable release should be perceived as being in beta testing phase (meaning they already passed alpha-testing and are moderately settled).
- `stable` will be updated only upon releases with code tested during public beta-testing phase in `main` branch.

Here are code snippets for some common installation methods:

- Manually with `git clone` (compatible with [mini.deps](https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim/blob/main/readmes/mini-deps.md)):

```lua
-- Put this at the top of 'init.lua'
local path_package = vim.fn.stdpath('data') .. '/site'
local mini_path = path_package .. '/pack/deps/start/mini.nvim'
if not vim.loop.fs_stat(mini_path) then
  vim.cmd('echo "Installing `mini.nvim`" | redraw')
  local clone_cmd = {
    'git', 'clone', '--filter=blob:none',
    -- Uncomment next line to use 'stable' branch
    -- '--branch', 'stable',
    'https://github.com/echasnovski/mini.nvim', mini_path
  }
  vim.fn.system(clone_cmd)
  vim.cmd('packadd mini.nvim | helptags ALL')
end
```

- With [folke/lazy.nvim](https://github.com/folke/lazy.nvim):

| Branch | Code snippet                                    |
|--------|-------------------------------------------------|
| Main   | `{ 'echasnovski/mini.nvim', version = false },` |
| Stable | `{ 'echasnovski/mini.nvim', version = '*' },`   |

- With [junegunn/vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug):

| Branch | Code snippet                                           |
|--------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Main   | `Plug 'echasnovski/mini.nvim'`                         |
| Stable | `Plug 'echasnovski/mini.nvim', { 'branch': 'stable' }` |

- Every module is also distributed as a standalone Git repository. Check out module's information for more details.

**Important**: don't forget to call module's `setup()` (if required) to enable its functionality.

**Note**: if you are on Windows, there might be problems with too long file paths (like `error: unable to create file <some file name>: Filename too long`). Try doing one of the following:
- Enable corresponding git global config value: `git config --system core.longpaths true`. Then try to reinstall.
- Install plugin in other place with shorter path.

## Modules

'mini.nvim' contains many modules which is slightly daunting at first. All of them can be used independently, one at a time. For easier exploration, here they are presented in groups based on module's primary functionality (although some modules can fit in several groups).

### Text editing

These modules improve your text editing experience. Start with 'mini.ai', 'mini.operators', and 'mini.surround'.

| Module          | Description                           | Overview                             | Details                              |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| mini.ai         | Extend and create `a`/`i` textobjects | [README](readmes/mini-ai.md)         | [Help file](doc/mini-ai.txt)         |
| mini.align      | Align text interactively              | [README](readmes/mini-align.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-align.txt)      |
| mini.comment    | Comment lines                         | [README](readmes/mini-comment.md)    | [Help file](doc/mini-comment.txt)    |
| mini.completion | Completion and signature help         | [README](readmes/mini-completion.md) | [Help file](doc/mini-completion.txt) |
| mini.move       | Move any selection in any direction   | [README](readmes/mini-move.md)       | [Help file](doc/mini-move.txt)       |
| mini.operators  | Text edit operators                   | [README](readmes/mini-operators.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-operators.txt)  |
| mini.pairs      | Autopairs                             | [README](readmes/mini-pairs.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-pairs.txt)      |
| mini.snippets   | Manage and expand snippets            | [README](readmes/mini-snippets.md)   | [Help file](doc/mini-snippets.txt)   |
| mini.splitjoin  | Split and join arguments              | [README](readmes/mini-splitjoin.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-splitjoin.txt)  |
| mini.surround   | Surround actions                      | [README](readmes/mini-surround.md)   | [Help file](doc/mini-surround.txt)   |

### General workflow

These modules improve your general workflow. Start with 'mini.bracketed', 'mini.files', and 'mini.pick'.

| Module         | Description                              | Overview                            | Details                             |
|----------------|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| mini.basics    | Common configuration presets             | [README](readmes/mini-basics.md)    | [Help file](doc/mini-basics.txt)    |
| mini.bracketed | Go forward/backward with square brackets | [README](readmes/mini-bracketed.md) | [Help file](doc/mini-bracketed.txt) |
| mini.bufremove | Remove buffers                           | [README](readmes/mini-bufremove.md) | [Help file](doc/mini-bufremove.txt) |
| mini.clue      | Show next key clues                      | [README](readmes/mini-clue.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-clue.txt)      |
| mini.deps      | Plugin manager                           | [README](readmes/mini-deps.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-deps.txt)      |
| mini.diff      | Work with diff hunks                     | [README](readmes/mini-diff.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-diff.txt)      |
| mini.extra     | Extra 'mini.nvim' functionality          | [README](readmes/mini-extra.md)     | [Help file](doc/mini-extra.txt)     |
| mini.files     | Navigate and manipulate file system      | [README](readmes/mini-files.md)     | [Help file](doc/mini-files.txt)     |
| mini.git       | Git integration                          | [README](readmes/mini-git.md)       | [Help file](doc/mini-git.txt)       |
| mini.jump      | Jump to next/previous single character   | [README](readmes/mini-jump.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-jump.txt)      |
| mini.jump2d    | Jump within visible lines                | [README](readmes/mini-jump2d.md)    | [Help file](doc/mini-jump2d.txt)    |
| mini.misc      | Miscellaneous functions                  | [README](readmes/mini-misc.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-misc.txt)      |
| mini.pick      | Pick anything                            | [README](readmes/mini-pick.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-pick.txt)      |
| mini.sessions  | Session management                       | [README](readmes/mini-sessions.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-sessions.txt)  |
| mini.visits    | Track and reuse file system visits       | [README](readmes/mini-visits.md)    | [Help file](doc/mini-visits.txt)    |

### Appearance

These modules improve your Neovim appearance. Start with 'mini.hues', 'mini.icons', and 'mini.statusline'.

| Module           | Description                          | Overview                              | Details                               |
|------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| mini.animate     | Animate common Neovim actions        | [README](readmes/mini-animate.md)     | [Help file](doc/mini-animate.txt)     |
| mini.base16      | Base16 colorscheme creation          | [README](readmes/mini-base16.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-base16.txt)      |
| mini.colors      | Tweak and save any color scheme      | [README](readmes/mini-colors.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-colors.txt)      |
| mini.cursorword  | Autohighlight word under cursor      | [README](readmes/mini-cursorword.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-cursorword.txt)  |
| mini.hipatterns  | Highlight patterns in text           | [README](readmes/mini-hipatterns.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-hipatterns.txt)  |
| mini.hues        | Generate configurable color scheme   | [README](readmes/mini-hues.md)        | [Help file](doc/mini-hues.txt)        |
| mini.icons       | Icon provider                        | [README](readmes/mini-icons.md)       | [Help file](doc/mini-icons.txt)       |
| mini.indentscope | Visualize and work with indent scope | [README](readmes/mini-indentscope.md) | [Help file](doc/mini-indentscope.txt) |
| mini.map         | Window with buffer text overview     | [README](readmes/mini-map.md)         | [Help file](doc/mini-map.txt)         |
| mini.notify      | Show notifications                   | [README](readmes/mini-notify.md)      | [Help file](doc/mini-notify.txt)      |
| mini.starter     | Start screen                         | [README](readmes/mini-starter.md)     | [Help file](doc/mini-starter.txt)     |
| mini.statusline  | Statusline                           | [README](readmes/mini-statusline.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-statusline.txt)  |
| mini.tabline     | Tabline                              | [README](readmes/mini-tabline.md)     | [Help file](doc/mini-tabline.txt)     |
| mini.trailspace  | Trailspace (highlight and remove)    | [README](readmes/mini-trailspace.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-trailspace.txt)  |

### Other

These modules don't quite fit in any of the previous categories.

| Module     | Description                | Overview                        | Details                         |
|------------|----------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| mini.doc   | Generate Neovim help files | [README](readmes/mini-doc.md)   | [Help file](doc/mini-doc.txt)   |
| mini.fuzzy | Fuzzy matching             | [README](readmes/mini-fuzzy.md) | [Help file](doc/mini-fuzzy.txt) |
| mini.test  | Test Neovim plugins        | [README](readmes/mini-test.md)  | [Help file](doc/mini-test.txt)  |

## General principles

- **Design**. Each module is designed to solve a particular problem targeting balance between feature-richness (handling as many edge-cases as possible) and simplicity of implementation/support. Granted, not all of them ended up with the same balance, but it is the goal nevertheless.

- **Independence**. Modules are independent of each other and can be run without external dependencies. Although some of them may need dependencies for full experience.

- **Structure**. Each module is a submodule for a placeholder "mini" module. So, for example, "surround" module should be referred to as "mini.surround".  As later will be explained, this plugin can also be referred to as "MiniSurround".

- **Setup**:
    - Each module you want to use should be enabled separately with `require(<name of module>).setup({})`. Possibly replace `{}` with your config table or omit altogether to use defaults. You can supply only parts of config, the rest will be inferred from defaults.

    - Call to module's `setup()` always creates a global Lua object with coherent camel-case name: `require('mini.surround').setup()` creates `_G.MiniSurround`. This allows for a simpler usage of plugin functionality: instead of `require('mini.surround')` use `MiniSurround` (or manually `:lua MiniSurround.*` in command line); available from `v:lua` like `v:lua.MiniSurround`. Considering this, "module" and "Lua object" names can be used interchangeably: 'mini.surround' and 'MiniSurround' will mean the same thing.

    - Each supplied `config` table is stored in `config` field of global object. Like `MiniSurround.config`.

    - Values of `config` which affect runtime activity can be changed on the fly to have effect. For example, `MiniSurround.config.n_lines` can be changed during runtime; but changing `MiniSurround.config.mappings` won't have any effect (as mappings are created once during `setup()`).

    - If module works best with some specific non-default option value, it is set during `setup()` but only if it was not explicitly set (by user or another plugin, no matter the value) before that.

- **Buffer local configuration**. Each module can be additionally configured to use certain runtime config settings locally to buffer. See `mini.nvim-buffer-local-config` section in help file for more information.

- **Buffer names**. All module-related buffers are named according to the following format: `mini<module-name>://<buffer-number>/<useful-info>` (forward slashes are used on any platform; `<useful-info>` may be empty). This structure allows creating identifiable, reasonably unique, and useful buffer names. For example, 'mini.files' buffers are created per displayed directory/file with names like `minifiles://10/path/to/displayed/directory`.

- **Disabling**. Each module's core functionality can be disabled globally or locally to buffer. See "Disabling" section in module's help page for more details. See `mini.nvim-disabling-recipes` section in main help file for common recipes.

- **Silencing**. Each module providing non-error feedback can be configured to not do that by setting `config.silent = true` (either inside `setup()` call or on the fly).

- **Highlighting**. Appearance of module's output is controlled by certain set of highlight groups (see `:h highlight-groups`). By default they usually link to some semantically close built-in highlight group and are ensured to be defined after any color scheme takes effect. Use `:highlight` command or `vim.api.nvim_set_hl()` Lua function to customize highlighting. To see a more calibrated look, use 'mini.hues', 'mini.base16', or plugin's color scheme.

- **Stability**. Each module upon release is considered to be relatively stable: both in terms of setup and functionality. Any non-bugfix backward-incompatible change will be released gradually as much as possible.

- **Not filetype/language specific**. Including functionality which needs several filetype/language specific implementations is an explicit no-goal of this project. This is mostly due to the potential increase in maintenance to keep implementation up to date. However, any part which might need filetype/language specific tuning should be designed to allow it by letting user set proper buffer options and/or local configuration.

## Plugin colorschemes

This plugin comes with several color schemes (all have both dark and light variants):

- `randomhue` - random background and foreground of the same hue with medium saturation.
- `minicyan` - cyan and grey main colors with medium contrast and saturation palette.
- `minischeme` - blue and yellow main colors with high contrast and saturation palette.

Activate them as regular `colorscheme` (for example, `:colorscheme randomhue` or `:colorscheme minicyan`). You can see how they look in [demo of 'mini.hues'](readmes/mini-hues.md#demo) or [demo of 'mini.base16'](readmes/mini-base16.md#demo).

## Planned modules

This is the list of modules I currently intend to implement eventually (as my free time and dedication will allow), in alphabetical order:

- 'mini.abbrev' - helper to manage/setup Insert mode abbreviations.
- 'mini.cmdline' - improved Command line. Possibly with custom `vim.ui.input` implementation.
- 'mini.cycle' - cycle through alternatives with pre-defined rules. Something like [monaqa/dial.nvim](https://github.com/monaqa/dial.nvim) and [AndrewRadev/switch.vim](https://github.com/AndrewRadev/switch.vim)
- 'mini.folds' - more capable and user-friendly folds.
- 'mini.keymap' - utilities to make non-trivial mappings: like [max397574/better-escape.nvim](https://github.com/max397574/better-escape.nvim), dot-repeatable mappings, "super" mappings (super-tab, super-shift-tab, super-enter).
- 'mini.repl' - extendable wrapper for REPLs with built-in support for R, Python, Julia, and maybe (just maybe) some AI tools.
- 'mini.sendtext' - send text between buffers. In particular between regular and built-in terminal buffers.
- 'mini.statuscolumn' - customizable 'statuscolumn'.
- 'mini.terminals' - coherently manage interactive terminal buffers. Something like [kassio/neoterm](https://github.com/kassio/neoterm). Might also incorporate functionality to asynchronously run code in shell with post-processed results.
- 'mini.quickfix' - more capable and user-friendly quickfix list. Possibly with preview and inline editing for search-and-replace workflow.
- 'mini.windows' - window manager. Interactive picker, layout organizer, and maybe more.
